#3723 - Django 5.2 Upgrade - [potato] (#4867)
cisagov/getgov: docs/architecture/decisions/0030-django-state-control.md

Reviewer: thank you for compiling this! From what's on here I agree with moving forward with `django-fsm-2` - I don't see many immediate benefits refactoring to viewflow atm

> # 30. Django state control after upgrading to Django 5.2

Reviewer 2: This ADR is excellent!  Easy to follow and thorough on trade-offs.  Thanks for the dive into the technicalities and the write-up.

Date: 2026-04-01

## Status

Proposed

## Context

The Django 5.2 upgrade no longer supports the `django-fsm` library, it is both archived and no longer maintained. A replacement is required to continue enforcing finite state machine (FSM) transitions on four models: `Domain`, `DomainRequest`, `DomainInvitation`, and `PortfolioInvitation`.

The project has a strong preference for state security: transitions should be enforced in code, and direct manipulation of state fields should be prevented wherever possible. The two main candidates evaluated are `django-fsm-2` (a community fork of the original library) and `viewflow` (an actively maintained Django workflow and FSM framework).

## Decision

(#1) Use `django-fsm-2`

The library is a direct drop-in replacement for the archived `django-fsm`, is already integrated into the project, and provides the same class of state protection as viewflow. The license, migration cost, and design fit all favor staying with django-fsm-2.

## Considered Options

### 1. django-fsm-2

> This would mean replacing the `django-fsm` import with a `django-fsm-2` import and adopting that library as a dependency. `Django-fsm-2` is a community-maintained fork of the original `django-fsm`, transferred to and maintained under [django-commons](https://github.com/django-commons/django-fsm).

Reviewer: Is the link meant to direct to the link for [django-fsm-2](https://github.com/django-commons/django-fsm-2)? If it was originally meant for django-fsm, it looks like the link doesn't work anymore if the original fsm is no longer under django commons

Author: I think I manually added django-fsm into the link on accident. I meant to link to the django-commons page where it describes the maintainers of the project. Just updated!

In this option, the state field is a FSMfield and transition logic is on the model.

> + Simply requires replacing the import in the pipfile-zero migration cost, same import path (`from django_fsm import FSMField, transition`)

Reviewer: oh woah I was originally reading this as a rich diff so I can read more easily and the rich text format doesn't differentiate between `+`,`-`, or `*` when converting things into bullets. Would it be helpful to label the + and - lists under a Advantages/Risks header? 

<img width="1065" height="654" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2f5b8ed3-993c-416c-bb73-e40d33f35840" />

Author: Ohhhh ewww, it looks so bad in that format! Yes good ask, I will add that!

- Fork of an archived project — long-term health depends on the django-commons community staying active
- Smaller contributor pool than django-fsm
- Does not prevent ORM-level bypasses: `Model.objects.filter(...).update(status='value')` still makes changes, no protection at that level as there wasn't protection against this with `django-fsm`
- `protected=False` is an available flag that can override the django-fsm-2 protections, however this too existed in django-fsm. Continues the same potential of misuse.

### 2. viewflow FSM

Adopt viewflow and add it as a dependency, reworking the code to be compatible with it's fsm implementation. [Viewflow](https://viewflow.io) is more than just an FSM it also provides "BPMN-style workflows", "process orchestration,"  and more, meant to be used for complex system workflows.

In this option, the state field is a regular char field using enums (not an FSMfield) and transition logic is in a seperate flow class (not the model).

+ Actively maintained with a wide audience (2.9k GitHub stars, 416 forks, 365 dependent projects); with code commits as recent as Jan 2026
+ Supports Django 4.2–6.0
+ Uses Python enums for state definitions

> + Always enforces protected state at the Python descriptor level, meaning there ability to add `protected=False` and override functionality

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
+ Always enforces protected state at the Python descriptor level, meaning there's no ability to add `protected=False` and override functionality
```
